---
title: Incentives for projects and pull requests
tags:
  - bitcoin-core
date: 2025-02-26
---

Early days mostly volunteers only couple paid developers

Features went in as passion projects

Work on tirelessly

Landscape has shifted to full time jobs

Publish or perish is the saying in academics

If you're making a name for yourself as a professor you need published papers,
getting citations, working to get grants. Feels like this now

If they're working on something hard to tell if they're working on it to stay
employed, or whether it's passion project.

Hard to tell if we'll always get good contributors

Promise grant committee, but you don't get buy in from other devs, so you keep
pushing without full consensus.

Opensats long term contributor grants which are good because they trust you

Newer contributors need to specify what they're working on for a grant

You might underestimate how popular a project is you get a grant for, but you
still have to work on it.

To show visibility for grant, you will open a PR just to get visibility to have
something merged.

Some have to give quarterly reporting for what you did.

Pressure is felt to show visibility, but most productive work is just keeping
your head down working on passionate things. Risk that you tried something for
months with nothing to show for it.

2 requirements - get newer contributors to do something that is not visible, and
also to get grant givers to value contributions that are not visible.

Maybe recognize research that is not a tangible published commit.

Being a maintainer is enough to know their contributions, but otherwise you
could be doing quality work without looking good on paper.

End state of academia, with lots of bureaucracy, little money, lots of
committees and pandering to politics.

Maybe publish a definitive list of what is important. We want detailed code
reviews. Find a mentor, pair with them and get recommendation from them.
Tracking site like Ack or Nack.

Donors also have to get assurance from grant orgs that their donations go to
important things. There's an image problem for orgs that just do plumbing and
not ship flashy things.

Educate people who provide the money that it's important.

Hard to attract new contributors if we only tell them that we need to review.
Talented motivated people want to work on new features. These might not be the
ones we want to attract then. Maybe push them to work on adjacent projects that
consume bitcoin core, then something that bugs them about bitcoin core will
motivate them to look at bitcoin core and fix something due to passion.

Typical engineers work on coding something based on specifications. There's no
real place for an engineer like that in this project.

Question should be how can I make bitcoin core better, not how do I get a pay
check.

How to approach someone who is working just for a grant. Try and talk to their
grant giver that the pressure is not helping. Might be useful to talk to them.
Try to guide them to more interesting things.
